README.md, before:

A simple work queue that actually works

Description
-----------

This is a simple work queue written in python.  

The work queue does not require root privilege to run.  It does not require
daemons running on any of the work nodes in the cluster.  A server instance can
be run by any user and other users schedule jobs using a client.  When
scheduled to run, the client logs into the appropriate node using ssh and then
executes the job.

For best results, users should have ssh keys and an ssh agent running to allow
ssh login to the nodes without typing their pass-phrase.  When submitting many
jobs, it is appropriate to use "nohup" and put the client in the background.

The only queue currently supported is a very simple matching queue with
priorities.  This is **very** simple: jobs are put in the queue in order they
arrive.  Each time the queue is refreshed, the first one that can run will run,
with higher priority jobs checked first.  There is also a special priority
"block" that blocks other jobs until it can run.  A TODO is to make this
smarter so it only blocks jobs that directly compete for needed resources.

Another queue could be plugged in easily if desired.

The wq Script
-------------

All operations are performed using the wq script (short for "work queue"), such
as running the server, starting jobs, listing the queue, etc.  You specify a
command and a set of arguments and options for that command. e.g.  to submit
jobs

    wq sub [options] [args]

To get help for wq use "wq -h".  To get help on a wq command, use "wq command
-h".

Submitting Jobs
---------------

You can either submit using a job file, written in YAML, or by sending the
commands as an option

    wq sub job_file 
    wq sub -c command

The job file contains a "command" and a set of requirements; see the Job Files
section for more details.  You can also send requirements using -r/--require
    
    wq sub -r requirements job_file
    wq sub -r requirements -c command

Requirements sent using -r will over-ride those in the job file.  For
a list of available requirements fields, see the Requirements sub-section.

Note if you need to keep the outputs of your command, you need to redirect them
to files yourself.

### Putting Jobs in the Background

You may want to submit a large number of jobs at once.  This is most convenient
if the jobs go into the background.  The best way to do this is using nohup and
redirecting the output to a file.  This puts stdout/stderr into a logfile

    nohup wq sub job_file &> logfile  &

As shown above, when using nohup, you should redirect the wq outputs to files;
otherwise the output will just go to a file called nohup.out in your current
working directory.  Note this output is just the output of the wq script; your
commands should take care of their own stdout/stdin.


###  Job Files

The job files and requirements are all in YAML syntax
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML>.  For example, to run the command "dostuff
-i /some/input -o /some/output on a single core, this would be the job file

    command: dostuff -i /some/input -o /some/output

Don't forget the space between the colon ":" and the value.  You can also put
requirements in the job file.  For example, to grab 3 cores and only use  nodes
from groups gen1 and gen2, but not group slow

    command: dostuff -i /some/input -o /some/output
    N: 3
    group: [gen1, gen3]
    notgroup: slow

Note group/notgroup are special in that they can take either a scalar or a
list. You can also specify lists using note-taking notation

    group:
        - gen1
        - gen2

Don't forget the space between dash "-" and value. See the Requirements
sub-section for a full list of requirements

### specifying comands as arguments

In addition to using job files, you can run a command by specifying -c and an
argument

    wq sub -c script

Remember to quote commands that have spaces/arguments.   For example, 

    wq sub -c "cd /some/dir; script -a input"

### Sending Requirements on the Command Line

You can specify requirements on the command line using -r/--require.

    wq sub -r "mode: bynode; N: 5" -c some_command

Each requirement is valid YAML. Note, however, that each element is separated
by a semicolon, which is **not** valid YAML.  Internally the semicolons are
replaced by newlines.  Also, you are are allowed to leave off the required
space between colon ":" and value; these are put in for you.  After these
pre-processing steps, the requirements are parsed just like a job file.

If you need a semicolon in your requirements, or if adding a space after colons
causes problems, try using a full job file.

### Requirements

By default, a job is simply assigned a single core on the first available node.
You can use requirements to change what nodes are selected for your job. The following
is the full list

* mode - The mode of node selection.  Available modes are
 * bycore - Select single cores.  Modifiers like *N* refer to number of cores.
 * bycore1 - Select cores from a single node.
 * bynode - Select full nodes.  Modifiers like *N* refer to number of nodes.
 * byhost - Select a particular host by name.  Modifiers like *N* refer to number of cores.
 * bygroup - Select **all** the nodes from particular groups; different from the *group* requirement.
* N - The number of nodes or cores, depending on the mode.
* group - Select cores or nodes from the specified group or groups.  This can be a scalar or list
* notgroup - Select cores or nodes from machines not in the specified group or groups.
* min_cores - Limit to nodes with at least this many cores.  Currently only applies when mode is *bynode* (should this work for bycore selections?).
* min_mem - Limit to nodes with at least this much memory in GB.  Currently only applies when mode is *bycore*, *bycore1*, *bynode*.
* X - This determines if ssh X display forwarding is used, default is False. For yes use true,1 for no use false,0
* priority - Currently should be one of 
 * low - lowest priority
 * med - medium priority, the default
 * high - high priority
 * block - block other jobs until this one can run.
* job_name - A name to display in job listings. Usually the command, or an abbreviated form of the command, is shown.
* hostfile - An optional file in which to save allocated node names. Useful for MPI jobs using mpirun.


Here is a full, commented example

    # this is the command to be run.
    command: dostuff -a 35

    # show this name in job listings instead of the command
    job_name: dostuff35 

    # this is the type of node/host selection. bynode means select entire nodes.
    mode: bynode

    # Since the mode is bynode, this means 5 full nodes
    N: 5

    # Select from this group(s)
    group: gen1

    # Do not select from this set of groups
    notgroup: [slow,crappy]

    # require at least this many cores
    min_cores: 8

### running an MPI code


To run an MPI code, get hostnames through the hostfile requirement, e.g.

    wq -r "N:16;hostfile:hfile" -c "mpirun -hostfile hfile ./mycode"



Getting an interactive shell on a worker node
---------------------------------------------

For an interactive shell, just use "bash" or your favorite shell as the
command.  If you need the display for graphics, plotting, etc. make sure
to send the X requirement.  e.g.

    wq sub -c bash
    wq sub -r "X:1" -c bash


Getting Statistics For the Cluster and Queue
--------------------------------------------

### Job Listings 

To get a job listing us "ls".  Send -f or --full to see a full list of
nodes for each job and the full command line. Send -u/--user to restrict
the job list to a particular user or list of users (comma separated).


    wq ls
    wq ls -f
    wq ls -u username
    wq ls -u user1,user2 -f

Here is an example of a normal listing

    Pid   User Status Priority Ncores Nhosts Command t_in      t_run    
    2530  anze R      med      132    11     runner  12h50m27s 12h50m27s
    3246  anze R      med      104    13     bash    12h24m28s 12h24m28s
    18743 anze W      med      -      -      mpirun  29m52s    -        
    Jobs: 3 Running: 2 Waiting: 1


### Cluster and Queue Status

Use the "stat" command to get a summary of the cluster usage and queue
status.

    wq stat

For each node, the usage is displayed using an asterisk * for used cores and a
dot . for unused cores.  for example [***....] means three used and 4 unused
cores.  Also displayed is the memory available in gigabytes and the groups for
each host.

Here is an example

    usage           host      mem groups    
    [************]  astro0001  32 gen4,gen45
    [************]  astro0004  32 gen4,gen45
    [********....]  astro0010  48 gen5,gen45
    [............]  astro0011  48 gen5,gen45
    [....]          astro0016   8 gen1,slow 
    [*...]          astro0017   8 gen2,slow 
    [....]          astro0018   8 gen2,slow 
    [....]          astro0020   8 gen2,slow 
    [********]      astro0031  32 gen3      
    [****....]      astro0032  32 gen3      
    [........]      astro0033  32 gen3      


Refreshing the Queue
--------------------

The server refreshes every 30 seconds by default.  To request a refresh
use the "refresh" command

    wq refresh

Removing Jobs
-------------

To remove a job or jobs from the queue, send the "rm" command

    wq rm pid

Where pid is the process id you can get using "wq ls".  The pid can be a comma
separated list.  To remove all of your jobs

    wq rm all

Only root can remove jobs for another user.

Starting a Server
-----------------

    wq serve cluster_description

The cluster description file has a line for each work node in your cluster.
The format is

    hostname ncores mem groups


The mem is in gigabytes, and can be floating point.  The groups are optional
and comma separated.  You can change the port for sockets using -p; 

    wq -p portnum serve descfile

the clients will also need to use that port.

    wq -p portnum sub jobfile


Installation
------------

### Dependencies

You need a fairly recent python and pyyaml <http://pyyaml.org/>

### Install

Get the source, untar it, cd into the created directory, and type this
to install into the "usual" place

    python setup.py install

To install into a particular prefix

    python setup.py install --prefix=/some/path

Commit message:

started a 'tips and tricks' section in the readme

README.md, after:

A simple work queue that actually works

Description
-----------

This is a simple work queue written in python.  

The work queue does not require root privilege to run.  It does not require
daemons running on any of the work nodes in the cluster.  A server instance can
be run by any user and other users schedule jobs using a client.  When
scheduled to run, the client logs into the appropriate node using ssh and then
executes the job.

For best results, users should have ssh keys and an ssh agent running to allow
ssh login to the nodes without typing their pass-phrase.  When submitting many
jobs, it is appropriate to use "nohup" and put the client in the background.

The only queue currently supported is a very simple matching queue with
priorities.  This is **very** simple: jobs are put in the queue in order they
arrive.  Each time the queue is refreshed, the first one that can run will run,
with higher priority jobs checked first.  There is also a special priority
"block" that blocks other jobs until it can run.  A TODO is to make this
smarter so it only blocks jobs that directly compete for needed resources.

Another queue could be plugged in easily if desired.

The wq Script
-------------

All operations are performed using the wq script (short for "work queue"), such
as running the server, starting jobs, listing the queue, etc.  You specify a
command and a set of arguments and options for that command. e.g.  to submit
jobs

    wq sub [options] [args]

To get help for wq use "wq -h".  To get help on a wq command, use "wq command
-h".

Submitting Jobs
---------------

You can either submit using a job file, written in YAML, or by sending the
commands as an option

    wq sub job_file 
    wq sub -c command

The job file contains a "command" and a set of requirements; see the Job Files
section for more details.  You can also send requirements using -r/--require
    
    wq sub -r requirements job_file
    wq sub -r requirements -c command

Requirements sent using -r will over-ride those in the job file.  For
a list of available requirements fields, see the Requirements sub-section.

Note if you need to keep the outputs of your command, you need to redirect them
to files yourself.

### Putting Jobs in the Background

You may want to submit a large number of jobs at once.  This is most convenient
if the jobs go into the background.  The best way to do this is using nohup and
redirecting the output to a file.  This puts stdout/stderr into a logfile

    nohup wq sub job_file &> logfile  &

As shown above, when using nohup, you should redirect the wq outputs to files;
otherwise the output will just go to a file called nohup.out in your current
working directory.  Note this output is just the output of the wq script; your
commands should take care of their own stdout/stdin.


###  Job Files

The job files and requirements are all in YAML syntax
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML>.  For example, to run the command "dostuff
-i /some/input -o /some/output on a single core, this would be the job file

    command: dostuff -i /some/input -o /some/output

Don't forget the space between the colon ":" and the value.  You can also put
requirements in the job file.  For example, to grab 3 cores and only use  nodes
from groups gen1 and gen2, but not group slow

    command: dostuff -i /some/input -o /some/output
    N: 3
    group: [gen1, gen3]
    notgroup: slow

Note group/notgroup are special in that they can take either a scalar or a
list. You can also specify lists using note-taking notation

    group:
        - gen1
        - gen2

Don't forget the space between dash "-" and value. See the Requirements
sub-section for a full list of requirements

### specifying comands as arguments

In addition to using job files, you can run a command by specifying -c and an
argument

    wq sub -c script

Remember to quote commands that have spaces/arguments.   For example, 

    wq sub -c "cd /some/dir; script -a input"

### Sending Requirements on the Command Line

You can specify requirements on the command line using -r/--require.

    wq sub -r "mode: bynode; N: 5" -c some_command

Each requirement is valid YAML. Note, however, that each element is separated
by a semicolon, which is **not** valid YAML.  Internally the semicolons are
replaced by newlines.  Also, you are are allowed to leave off the required
space between colon ":" and value; these are put in for you.  After these
pre-processing steps, the requirements are parsed just like a job file.

If you need a semicolon in your requirements, or if adding a space after colons
causes problems, try using a full job file.

### Requirements

By default, a job is simply assigned a single core on the first available node.
You can use requirements to change what nodes are selected for your job. The following
is the full list

* mode - The mode of node selection.  Available modes are
 * bycore - Select single cores.  Modifiers like *N* refer to number of cores.
 * bycore1 - Select cores from a single node.
 * bynode - Select full nodes.  Modifiers like *N* refer to number of nodes.
 * byhost - Select a particular host by name.  Modifiers like *N* refer to number of cores.
 * bygroup - Select **all** the nodes from particular groups; different from the *group* requirement.
* N - The number of nodes or cores, depending on the mode.
* group - Select cores or nodes from the specified group or groups.  This can be a scalar or list
* notgroup - Select cores or nodes from machines not in the specified group or groups.
* min_cores - Limit to nodes with at least this many cores.  Currently only applies when mode is *bynode* (should this work for bycore selections?).
* min_mem - Limit to nodes with at least this much memory in GB.  Currently only applies when mode is *bycore*, *bycore1*, *bynode*.
* X - This determines if ssh X display forwarding is used, default is False. For yes use true,1 for no use false,0
* priority - Currently should be one of 
 * low - lowest priority
 * med - medium priority, the default
 * high - high priority
 * block - block other jobs until this one can run.
* job_name - A name to display in job listings. Usually the command, or an abbreviated form of the command, is shown.
* hostfile - An optional file in which to save allocated node names. Useful for MPI jobs using mpirun.


Here is a full, commented example

    # this is the command to be run.
    command: dostuff -a 35

    # show this name in job listings instead of the command
    job_name: dostuff35 

    # this is the type of node/host selection. bynode means select entire nodes.
    mode: bynode

    # Since the mode is bynode, this means 5 full nodes
    N: 5

    # Select from this group(s)
    group: gen1

    # Do not select from this set of groups
    notgroup: [slow,crappy]

    # require at least this many cores
    min_cores: 8

### running an MPI code


To run an MPI code, get hostnames through the hostfile requirement, e.g.

    wq -r "N:16;hostfile:hfile" -c "mpirun -hostfile hfile ./mycode"



Getting an interactive shell on a worker node
---------------------------------------------

For an interactive shell, just use "bash" or your favorite shell as the
command.  If you need the display for graphics, plotting, etc. make sure
to send the X requirement.  e.g.

    wq sub -c bash
    wq sub -r "X:1" -c bash

Note you can use tcsh if that is your login shell.  In this scenario, your
environment will be set up as normal.

Tips and Tricks
---------------

* Normally your environment is not set up when you run a command unless
  the command is a login shell like "bash".  You can get your setup byu
  sourcing your startup script. e.g. 
 * wq sub -c "source ~/.bashrc; command"

* you can start an interactive session and run a command series that is
  followed by "exit". This will free up node when you finish.
 * wq sub -c bash
   command; exit

Getting Statistics For the Cluster and Queue
--------------------------------------------

### Job Listings 

To get a job listing us "ls".  Send -f or --full to see a full list of
nodes for each job and the full command line. Send -u/--user to restrict
the job list to a particular user or list of users (comma separated).


    wq ls
    wq ls -f
    wq ls -u username
    wq ls -u user1,user2 -f

Here is an example of a normal listing

    Pid   User Status Priority Ncores Nhosts Command t_in      t_run    
    2530  anze R      med      132    11     runner  12h50m27s 12h50m27s
    3246  anze R      med      104    13     bash    12h24m28s 12h24m28s
    18743 anze W      med      -      -      mpirun  29m52s    -        
    Jobs: 3 Running: 2 Waiting: 1


### Cluster and Queue Status

Use the "stat" command to get a summary of the cluster usage and queue
status.

    wq stat

For each node, the usage is displayed using an asterisk * for used cores and a
dot . for unused cores.  for example [***....] means three used and 4 unused
cores.  Also displayed is the memory available in gigabytes and the groups for
each host.

Here is an example

    usage           host      mem groups    
    [************]  astro0001  32 gen4,gen45
    [************]  astro0004  32 gen4,gen45
    [********....]  astro0010  48 gen5,gen45
    [............]  astro0011  48 gen5,gen45
    [....]          astro0016   8 gen1,slow 
    [*...]          astro0017   8 gen2,slow 
    [....]          astro0018   8 gen2,slow 
    [....]          astro0020   8 gen2,slow 
    [********]      astro0031  32 gen3      
    [****....]      astro0032  32 gen3      
    [........]      astro0033  32 gen3      


Refreshing the Queue
--------------------

The server refreshes every 30 seconds by default.  To request a refresh
use the "refresh" command

    wq refresh

Removing Jobs
-------------

To remove a job or jobs from the queue, send the "rm" command

    wq rm pid

Where pid is the process id you can get using "wq ls".  The pid can be a comma
separated list.  To remove all of your jobs

    wq rm all

Only root can remove jobs for another user.

Starting a Server
-----------------

    wq serve cluster_description

The cluster description file has a line for each work node in your cluster.
The format is

    hostname ncores mem groups


The mem is in gigabytes, and can be floating point.  The groups are optional
and comma separated.  You can change the port for sockets using -p; 

    wq -p portnum serve descfile

the clients will also need to use that port.

    wq -p portnum sub jobfile


Installation
------------

### Dependencies

You need a fairly recent python and pyyaml <http://pyyaml.org/>

### Install

Get the source, untar it, cd into the created directory, and type this
to install into the "usual" place

    python setup.py install

To install into a particular prefix

    python setup.py install --prefix=/some/path
